Add constrained impersonation blog (KEP-5284) (#52916)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2025-11-xx-constrained-impersonation-alpha/index.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes v1.35: Constrained Impersonation - Pretending but Without the Fraud! (Alpha)"
date: 2025-11-XXT09:00:00-08:00
draft: true
slug: kubernetes-v1-35-constrained-impersonation-alpha
author: >
  [Ben Petersen](https://github.com/benjaminapetersen) (Microsoft)
---

## Constrained Impersonation: Prentending but Without the Fraud!

The word "impersonation" tends to elicit bad vibes.  In a world where
security threats lurk around every corner, rarely do we think of impersonation

> as a good thing.  But this release we are here to give you some new tools

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as a good thing.  But this release, I am here to give you some news 
about tools
```
I changed "we" here to I because there is only one author; see https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/blog/article-submission/#article-content and https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-using-we

to make impersonating users, groups, service accounts and nodes as exciting
as it sounds, but without the fraud!

When you hear "impersonation", you probably don’t think "security feature".

> You think fraud, spam calls, or that one colleague who can perfectly copy

Reviewer 2: This is redundant given the first paragraph, and it feels a little repetitive

---

## Quick recap: what is impersonation in Kubernetes?

Let's review impersonation in its current form.  We will call it "legacy impersonation".

User impersonation lets one Kubernetes identity (the **impersonator**) ask the
API server to handle a request *as if it came from* a different identity (the
**impersonated user**).

At the HTTP level, this is done using headers such as:

- `Impersonate-User`
- `Impersonate-Group`
- `Impersonate-Uid`
- `Impersonate-Extra-*`

And at the `kubectl` level, with flags like `--as` and `--as-group`.

The basic flow is:

1. The client authenticates as itself (for example, `system:serviceaccount:my-ns:deputy`).
2. It sends impersonation headers saying, "Please treat this request as if it
	 came from `panda@myfavoritebears.com`".
3. The API server checks whether the impersonator is allowed to impersonate
	 that identity.
4. If allowed, the request is then **authorized using the impersonated
	 user’s permissions**, not the impersonator’s.

Today, this is known as **legacy impersonation**. If you can impersonate a
user, you effectively get to do *anything that user can do*, anywhere in the

> cluster. Helpful for admins. Terrifying for controllers.

Reviewer: Also, it's backwards. It's helpful for controllers, but potentially terrifying for cluster admins.

---

## The problem: great for humans, too scary for controllers

Legacy impersonation is intentionally powerful. A cluster admin might use it
to debug a tricky RBAC rule:

```bash

> kubectl --as=panda@myfavoritebears.com get pods -n prod

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Impersonation with restrictions

Plain impersonation is powerful. A cluster admin might use it to debug a tricky authorization failure:

```bash
kubectl --as=panda@myfavoritebears.example --namespace prod get pods 
```

```

If this works, you know that Panda can list Pods in `prod`. If it fails, you

> know you have more RBAC spelunking to do.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
know you have more troubleshooting to do.
```

Failed authorization doesn't imply that the cluster uses RBAC authz mode.

But what if you want a **controller** to impersonate?

Examples from the KEP:

- A node-level agent (like a CNI plugin) wants to list Pods *only on the node
	it’s running on*.
- A "deputy" controller wants to impersonate users **just enough** to open a
	VM console on their behalf, but nothing else.

> With legacy impersonation, if you give these controllers the ability to

Reviewer: "Legacy" implies a little that you shouldn't use it, and that's not true.
```suggestion
With plain impersonation, if you give these controllers the ability to
```

impersonate a user or node, they inherit **all** of that identity’s powers.
That’s a big blast radius:

- A bug, misconfiguration, or compromise in the controller could escalate to
	full user or node privileges.
- It’s hard to express policies like, "this controller can impersonate Panda

> 	only to *list* Pods in this namespace, nothing more".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    only to **list** Pods in this one namespace, and nothing more".
```

So we want impersonation, but with **least privilege**. Enter constrained
impersonation.

---

## What is constrained impersonation?

Constrained impersonation is an alpha feature (Kubernetes v1.35,
`ConstrainedImpersonation` feature gate) that lets you say:

> This service account can impersonate this identity, **only** for these

> > specific verbs on these specific resources.

Reviewer: Don't use a block quote here; you aren't actually quoting a person, nor even an (attributed) LLM.

> Instead of a single, wide-open `impersonate` verb, the API server introduces

Reviewer: We write API verbs in bold, so:
```suggestion
Instead of a single, wide-open **impersonate** verb, the API server introduces
```

two families of more precise verbs:

1. **Who can you impersonate?**

> 	 These verbs answer "what kind of identity is allowed to be impersonated":

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   These verbs answer "what kind of identity is allowed to be impersonated":
```

	 - `impersonate:user-info` — generic users, groups, UIDs, and extras.
	 - `impersonate:serviceaccount` — service accounts.
	 - `impersonate:arbitrary-node` — any node.
	 - `impersonate:associated-node` — specifically the node the controller is

> 		 running on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **impersonate:user-info:\*** — impersonation of normal users (not ServiceAccounts), groups, UIDs, and extras.
   - **impersonate:serviceaccount:\*** — service accounts.
   - **impersonate:arbitrary-node:\*** — any node.
   - **impersonate:associated-node:\*** — the specific node where the client principal is running.
```

2. **What can you do *via* impersonation?**

	 These verbs answer "what actions are allowed while impersonating":

> 	 - `impersonate-on:<mode>:<verb>`

Reviewer 3: You need to introduce what a `mode` is before this point.

	 Examples:

	 - `impersonate-on:user-info:list` on Pods

> 	 - `impersonate-on:user-info:get` on `virtualmachines/console`

Reviewer: Why is the verb to open a console **get**? Maybe **connect** is easier to teach?

> 	 - `impersonate-on:associated-node:list` on Pods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **impersonate-on:user-info:list** on Pods
   - **impersonate-on:user-info:get** on `virtualmachines/console`
   - **impersonate-on:associated-node:list** on Pods
```

You express these via normal RBAC `Role` and `ClusterRole` objects, just like
any other verb.

> ---

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## How the API server checks constrained impersonation

When constrained impersonation is enabled and a request comes in with
impersonation headers, the API server adds a couple of extra

> `SubjectAccessReview` (SAR) checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SubjectAccessReview (SAR) checks.
```

Imagine a service account `system:serviceaccount:default:deputy` wants to
impersonate user `panda` to list Pods in the `default` namespace.

The API server does roughly this:

1. **Check: can you impersonate this identity at all?**

	 SAR for "who" you can impersonate, for example:

	 ```yaml
	 apiVersion: authorization.k8s.io/v1
	 kind: SubjectAccessReview
	 spec:
		 resourceAttributes:
			 group: authentication.k8s.io
			 resource: users
			 name: panda
			 verb: impersonate:user-info
		 user: system:serviceaccount:default:deputy
	 ```

	 If this fails, the request is denied (or falls back to legacy

> 	 impersonation, depending on how you’ve configured things).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If this fails, the request falls back to plain impersonation; if you
   haven't configured anything to allow that, the client receives a Forbidden
   response.
```
?

2. **Check: what are you allowed to do *via* impersonation?**

	 SAR for the action the impersonator wants to perform on behalf of the
	 impersonated user, for example:

	 ```yaml
	 apiVersion: authorization.k8s.io/v1
	 kind: SubjectAccessReview
	 spec:
		 resourceAttributes:
			 group: ""
			 resource: pods
			 namespace: default
			 verb: impersonate-on:user-info:list
		 user: system:serviceaccount:default:deputy
	 ```

3. **Then, as usual, check whether the impersonated user can do the thing.**

	 Just like legacy impersonation, the final authorization is still based on
	 the impersonated user’s RBAC. If `panda` can’t list Pods in `default`, the
	 request fails, even if the impersonator’s constrained impersonation
	 permissions are perfect.

If the constrained checks fail but the impersonator still has the old

> unscoped `impersonate` verb, the API server can fall back to legacy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the constrained checks fail but the impersonator still has permission for the existing, unscoped **impersonate** verb, the API server can fall back to plain
```

impersonation behavior. That gives you a transition path: enable the feature,
then gradually migrate specific flows to constrained impersonation.

Audit logs grow a new `authenticationMetadata.impersonationConstraint` field
to record which constrained verb allowed the request, so you can see *why*
impersonation was allowed, not just *that* it happened.

---

## Example: a controller impersonating its node

Let’s make this concrete with one of the [KEP](https://kep.k8s.io/5284)’s user stories.

You run a per-node controller (say, a CNI plugin or some node agent). It needs
to list Pods **on its own node**, but shouldn’t get cluster-wide Pod
permissions.

With constrained impersonation you can do this:

1. Allow it to impersonate the node it’s running on using
	 `impersonate:associated-node`.
2. Allow it to list Pods **via that impersonation** using
	 `impersonate-on:associated-node:list`.

> RBAC sketch:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a sketch for how you could grant that access using Kubernetes RBAC:
```

It does *not* become an all-powerful node or cluster admin.

---

## Example: a deputy controller acting for users

Another story from the KEP: a "deputy" controller that opens VM consoles on
behalf of users.

You want:

- Users to keep control over *what they are allowed to do*.
- The deputy to act "as the user" for just this one action, so audit logs and
	admission behave as if the user did it themselves.

With constrained impersonation, you:

1. Give the deputy permission to impersonate user identities using
	 `impersonate:user-info`.
2. Give it permission to perform the **specific** VM console action via
	 impersonation using `impersonate-on:user-info:get` on the
	 `virtualmachines/console` subresource.

RBAC sketch:

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
	name: impersonate-user-info
rules:
- apiGroups: ["authentication.k8s.io"]
	resources: ["users"]
	verbs: ["impersonate:user-info"]
---
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: Role
metadata:
	name: impersonate-vm-console
	namespace: default
rules:
- apiGroups: ["subresources.kubevirt.io"]
	resources: ["virtualmachines/console"]

> 	verbs: ["impersonate-on:user-info:get"]

Reviewer: Why is the verb to open a console **get**? Maybe **connect** is easier to teach?

```

Bind these to the deputy service account. Now, when the deputy impersonates a
user to open a VM console, the API server ensures:

- The deputy is allowed to impersonate that user.
- The deputy is allowed to perform the `get` console action via impersonation.
- The user themselves is allowed to get the console.

If any of those checks fail, the request fails. Your deputy can’t secretly do
more than users could do on their own.

---

## Why this is safer (and still backwards compatible)

Constrained impersonation is designed to be **additive** and **opt-in**:

- If you do nothing, legacy impersonation keeps working as before.
- You can enable the `ConstrainedImpersonation` feature gate, then start

> 	granting the new verbs to specific controllers or workflows.

Reviewer: This reads like an LLM wrote it, probably Anthropic Claude 4. If that's true, I recommend a reword to sound more like a human.

- You can gradually tighten things so that high-privilege service accounts no
	longer need unconstrained `impersonate` at all.

Security-wise, you get:

- Much smaller blast radius if a controller is compromised.
- Clear RBAC intent: "this thing can impersonate X, but only to do Y on Z".
- Better audit information about *why* an impersonation was allowed.

> You do pay a small cost: more `SubjectAccessReview` checks per impersonated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You do pay a small cost: more SubjectAccessReview checks per impersonated
```

request, which means a bit more load on your authorizer, especially if you use
webhooks. The implementation includes short-lived caching, and the KEP calls
this out as an acceptable trade-off for the additional safety.

---

## When should you use constrained impersonation?

You should consider constrained impersonation when:

> - A controller needs to act *as* a user or node, but only for a narrow set of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A controller needs to act as a user or node, but only for a narrow set of
```

	actions.
- You want audit logs to show real users (or nodes) as the actor, even though
	controllers are making the calls.

> - You’d like to stop handing out raw `impersonate` and move toward

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You’d like to stop handing out raw **impersonate** access and move toward
```

> 	least-privilege delegation.

Reviewer: Consider explaining that handing out **impersonate** means you must trust a principal not just to not abuse the target principal's current access, but all the access that the target will have in the future.
